# senazadeh-comp380

PROJECT TITLE 
Technology and the “Crisis” of Misinformation

TEAM MEMBERS
Christine Gao, Shruthi Gopalan, Ashley Wortham, Callie Xu, Sena Zadeh

SUMMARY of PROBLEM STATEMENT or RESEARCH QUESTION
Social media is making it increasingly easy to disperse misinformation as truth and create discourse on social media platforms, in politics, debates, etc. Misinformation is becoming so pervasive, that there is a worldwide concern regarding its ability to influence political, economic, and social well-being. In this website, we plan on examining several articles related to the issue of misinformation in order to understand how it can be created, distributed, and used to convince others of false ideas or concepts, as well as the negative effects the spread of misinformation can have. Our objective is to spread real information to others about the dangers of false information in order to encourage internet users to maintain caution as they peruse for information on the internet. We hope that this website will serve as a credible and dependable resource for young adults to come to when they’re looking to understand more about the dangers of misinformation, as well as ways to recognize misinformation in order to prevent acquiring fictitious knowledge.


MOTIVATION
Information disorder is the term often used to refer to the issue of misinformation on social media. It is the social danger that is the sharing or developing of false information either with or without the intent of harming others. This issue is interesting on a social level because in the current digital age, there exists an abundance of information on social media, always readily available for users to consume. With the growing use of social media and increased amount of information flowing in the form of easily digestible visuals and blurbs such as infographics, it’s easy to accept everything we see as true. However, the veracity of this information is not always clear which means that our target audience of high school and college-aged students may often be exposed to false information without their knowledge. Therefore, we are looking to address this issue of information disorder as it actively affects those in our target audience who utilize social media of any platform. Educating students on the spread of misinformation will hopefully encourage them to treat the information they see and promote on their social media presence with discretion. 


RESEARCH 
Vosoughi, Soroush, Deb Roy, and  Sinan Aral. “The spread of true and false news online.” 
Science.org, Science, 9 Mar 2018, https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aap9559
Misinformation is spreading faster than ever before, due largely in part to new social technologies. However, little is known about the extent of the contribution of technology to the spread of falsity, as studies have been limited to analyses of small, ad hoc samples that fail to address two important questions: 1) how do truth and falsity diffuse differently, and 2) what factors of human judgement explain these differences? In this study, Vosoughi et al. developed a model estimating the likelihood of retweeting posts on Twitter, finding that falsehoods were 70% more likely to be retweeted than the truth. 

Guess, Andrew, Jonathan Nagler, and Joshua Tucker. “Less than you think: Prevalence 
and predictors of fake news dissemination on Facebook.” ScienceAdvances, Science, 
9 Jan 2019, https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aau4586.
Following the 2016 presidential election, the spread and possible dissemination of “fake news” became one of the most widely discussed digital phenomena. Guess et al. investigate the news sharing behaviors of various demographic groups using a representative survey, finding that conservative respondents were more likely to share articles from fake-news spreading domains and Americans in the 60’s and older age group shared more than twice the amount of fake news articles than those in the next oldest age group. This paper discusses the potential effects of age on digital media literacy and the role of news feed and social network environment on people’s tendency to see, believe, and disperse untrustworthy information. 

Bakshey, Eytan, Solomon Messing, and Lada A. Adamic. “Exposure to ideologically diverse 
news and opinion on Facebook.” Science.org, Science, 5 Jun 2015, https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aaa1160.
Exposure to news, opinion, and civic information is occurring increasingly via online social networks and personalization of consumed content. In this study conducted on a large Facebook dataset, Bakshy et al. investigate the diversity of a broad set of news and opinion pieces shared on Facebook with those shared by an individuals’ friend network, compared with stories that appear on an algorithmically ranked News Feed, to observe what information individuals choose to consume via exposure on Facebook. The study found that individual choice, more than algorithms, limits an individual’s exposure to attitude-challenging or cross-cutting content. The composition of our friend networks is the most important factor limiting the diverse mix of content shared on social media, and thus the power to expose oneself to differing opinions in social media lies with the individual user. 

Bail, Christopher, et al. “Exposure to opposing views on social media can increase political 
polarization.” PNAS, National Academy of Sciences, 11 Sept 2018, 
https://www.pnas.org/content/115/37/9216.
	In recent years there has been increasing concern that social media sites are responsible for exacerbating political polarization by creating “echo chambers,” where individuals are exposed only to information from like-minded peers. In this paper, Bail et al. conducted a field experiment that offered monetary incentive to Democrat and Republican Twitter users to follow bots that retweeted messages from elected officials and opinion leaders with opposing political views. The findings showed that while Democrats exhibited slightly more liberal attitudes post treatment, Republicans exhibited substantially more conservative views posttreatment, revealing significant differences in “backfire” effects that increased political polarization. While past experiments suggest intergroup exchanges lead to compromise and mutual understanding, efforts to reduce political polarization on social media will require greater care and learning. 

Kramer, Adam, Jamie E. Guillory, and Jeffrey T. Hancock. “Experimental evidence of 
massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks.” PNAS, National Academy of Sciences, 17 June 2014, https://www.pnas.org/content/111/24/8788.
	Kramer et al. conducted a study on Facebook users to investigate the contagious effect of emotions expressed via content on social media on the moods of those exposed to emotional content. The results of the Facebook experiment shows that people who had positive content reduced in their feed used a larger percentage of negative words in their status update, and the pattern was reversed for individuals who had negative content reduced. These findings highlight the significance of “emotional contagion” through nonverbal mediums, and that textual content alone is a sufficient channel for impacting emotional expression online. Online messages can have a significant impact on our experience of emotions, which can affect our offline behaviors as well. Especially for young individuals, it is becoming of increasing importance to monitor emotionally charged content and how that influences how we perceive online media. 

Graham, David A. “The Real Problem With Fake News.” The Atlantic, 7 June 2019.
​​	In this article, Graham describes how the rise of fake news is making it more difficult for people to see what is true, rather than making them believe things that are false. For example, many Trump supporters began to refer to things as “fake news” when they come across information they dislike, rather than information that isn’t true. Graham also cites statistics to show that Republicans are more concerned about the effects of misinformation than Democrats. Additionally, he cites a study to show that the fake-news panic is causing more and more people to avoid consuming information overall. While this will help people to consume less misinformation, it will also result in the decreased consumption of important information, which may not be a good thing.



	

PLAN OF ACTION and POTENTIAL CHALLENGES/LIMITATIONS
	For our site we plan to develop a simple, user-friendly homepage that briefly describes the crisis of misinformation within technology and provide a menu bar for users to navigate to various other tabs within our site. Each tab will provide further in-depth analysis and break down certain areas of importance that are crucial to understand the misinformation and bias found on the internet and provide links to research articles from various sources to support our claims. 
Since this project is intended to educate the younger generation, we plan to incorporate graphics and images throughout our site to provide users visuals to aid in their understanding of the topic. Furthermore, we plan to vibrant colors and animations to keep the user/viewer engaged with the content on our site. Potential changes to our original plan are capable of occuring and we are flexible to incorporate additional details if deemed beneficial to the purpose of our project and content.
Our team has designated roles to individual members based on our strengths and experiences to complete this project to the best of our abilities. We have had no issue with communication thus far, therefore if a problem arises that we are unable to resolve on our own, we will reach out to our group members and work collectively as a team to find a solution. At this current stage we have no doubts or uncertainties in our capabilities to complete this project and create an informative site that provides insight into the world of misinformation within social media and how it affects its users.



OBJECTIVES
It is our intention to inform high school and college-aged students about the spread of misinformation over social media, the reasons behind them, and their consequences.  We hope to identify and establish approaches users can take to recognize misinformation and how to prevent it from spreading any further.  We not only want to spread awareness of this issue that plagues social media today, but we also want young internet users to become more mindful of the content they consume on the Internet.  By creating a cohesive setting for this information, our site will serve as a unique resource for users to learn about and test their knowledge on this topic.  Our goal is to discuss the extent to which misinformation of social media is harmful by analyzing how misinformation is created, believed, and spread throughout the internet and their effect on our social and political climates. 
